---
sidebar: toc
author: David Huron
creation-date: 'Tue Sep 1 10:17:29 EDT 1998'
revision-date: 'Thu Feb 3 10:15:57 EST 2000'
permalink:	/guide/ch26/index.html
---


Chapter 26
=========

Moving Signifiers Between Spines
================================

In many types of tasks is it useful to be able to transfer signifiers
from one spine to another. In this chapter we will discuss two commands.
The [**rend**](/tool/rend) command makes it possible to split
characters in a single spine and distribute them across two or more
spines. The [**cleave**](/tool/cleave) command does the reverse:
it allows characters that are distributed across two or more spines to
be gathered into a single new spine. These two commands provide
opportunities to create Humdrum spines that contain precisely the
information of interest to the user.


The *rend* Command
------------------

The [**rend**](/tool/rend) command allows a Humdrum spine to be
broken apart into two or more spines. Different pieces of information
can be distributed to the individual output spines. Consider for example
the following spine containing
[`**pitch`](/rep/pitch) data:\
\

  -----------
  `**pitch`
  Ab3
  F\#4
  C5
  \*-
  -----------
The **rend** command might be used to structure this as three
independent spines:\
\

  ------------ -- -- ---------- -- -- ----------------
  `**octave`         \*\*note         \*\*accidental
  3                  Ab               b
  4                  F\#              \#
  5                  C                .
  \*-                \*-              \*-
  ------------ -- -- ---------- -- -- ----------------
The operation of [**rend**](/tool/rend) requires a reassignment
file where each line contains an output exclusive interpretation,
followed by a tab, followed by a regular expression. In the above case,
the reassignment file (`reassign`) contained the following:

  ---------------- -- -- -------------
  `**octave`             \[0-9\]
  \*\*note               \[A-Gb\#x\]
  \*\*accidental         \[b\#x\]
  ---------------- -- -- -------------
The first line tells **rend** that any signifiers matching the
character-class 0-9 should be output in a spine labelled `**octave`. The
second line causes signifiers matching the upper-case letters A to G and
the `b`, `#` and `x` signifiers to be output in a spine labelled
`**note`. The third line causes signifiers matching just `b`, `#` and
`x` to be output in a spine labelled `**accidental`.

The above output was generated by invoking the following command:

`rend -i '**pitch' -f reassign` *inputfile*

Note that the **-i** and **-f** options are mandatory. The **-i** option
tells [**rend**](/tool/rend) which input spines to process and
the **-f** option tells **rend** the name of the file containing the
spine-reassignments.

The **rend** command is typically paired with a subsequent **cleave**
command.


The *cleave* Command
--------------------

The [**cleave**](/tool/cleave) command amalgamates concurrent
data tokens in two or more spines into a single data spine. In effect,
**cleave** does the opposite of [**rend**](/tool/rend). By way
of example, **cleave** can be used to transform the following:

  ------- -- -- ------- -- -- -------
  `**A`         \*\*B         \*\*C
  a             b             c
  A             B             C
  \*-           \*-           \*-
  ------- -- -- ------- -- -- -------
into:

  ---------
  `**new`
  abc
  ABC
  \*-
  ---------
Specifically, the above \"cleaving\" would be done using the following
command:

`cleave -i '**A,**B,**C' -o '**new'` *inputfile*

Both the **-i** and **-o** options are mandatory. The **-i** option
tells [**cleave**](/tool/cleave) which exclusive interpretations
should be cleaved together. In the above case, we have provided a list
of three types of data. The **-o** option tells
[**cleave**](/tool/cleave) what to call the resulting cleaved
spine. In this case, we\'ve simply called the result `**new`.

Suppose that we would like to automatically add key-velocities to some
[`**MIDI`](/rep/MIDI) data that reflect the normal
accents arising from the meter. For example, in 4/4 meter, we would like
the first note in each measure to be strongest, the third beat to be
next most strongest and so on. Recall that `**MIDI` data tokens consist
of three elements: (1) the duration in MIDI clock ticks, (2) the key
number (also on/off indication), and (3) the key velocity. In order to
add accents, we need to change the key velocity values. The maximum MIDI
key velocity value is 127; the minimum value is 0; and the default value
is 64.

Consider the following hypothetical input file:

  ----------
  `**kern`
  \*M4/4
  =1-
  4c
  8d
  8e
  8f
  8g
  8a
  8b
  =2
  2cc
  \*-
  ----------
The [**metpos**](/tool/metpos) command can be used to identify
the metric position of various note onsets. Before using **metpos**
however, we must use the [**timebase**](/tool/timebase) command
to create an isorhythmic record structure. Since the shortest note is an
eighth-note, the appropriate command is as follows.

`timebase -t 8 scale > scale.tb`

Using the timebased output, we can then invoke the **metpos** command:

`metpos scale.tb > scale.met`

The resulting output contains both the original input (on the left) and
the metric position spine (on the right):

  ---------- ------------
  `**kern`   \*\*metpos
  \*M4/4     \*M4/4
  \*tb8      \*tb8
  =1-        =1-
  4c         1
  .          4
  8d         3
  8e         4
  8f         2
  8g         4
  8a         3
  8b         4
  =2         =2
  2cc        1
  .          4
  .          3
  .          4
  \*-        \*-
  ---------- ------------
Let\'s now eliminate the null data tokens introduced by **timebase**.
Using [**humsed**](/tool/humsed), we delete each data record
beginning with a period character:

`humsed '/^\./d' scale.met > scale.tmp`

Next, we can use the [**recode**](/tool/recode) command to
change the metric position values to appropriate MIDI key velocities. We
might use the following reassignment file (named `accent`):

  ------ -- -------
  ==1       100
  ==2       80
  ==3       60
  ==4       40
  else      error
  ------ -- -------
In applying **recode** we will take care to avoid processing measure
numbers using the **-s** (skip) option:

`recode -f accent -s ^= -i '**metpos' scale.tmp > scale.acc`

The output will now appear as follows:

  ---------- ------------
  `**kern`   \*\*metpos
  \*M4/4     \*M4/4
  \*tb8      \*tb8
  =1-        =1-
  4c         100
  8d         60
  8e         40
  8f         80
  8g         40
  8a         60
  8b         40
  =2         =2
  2cc        100
  \*-        \*-
  ---------- ------------
Now we can use the [**midi**](/tool/midi) command to generate
`**MIDI` data:

`midi scale.acc > scale.mid`

The result is given below:

  -------------------- -- -- ------------
  `**MIDI`                   \*\*metpos
  \*Ch1                      \*
  \*M4/4                     \*M4/4
  \*tb8                      \*tb8
  =1-                        =1-
  72/60/64                   100
  72/-60/64 72/62/64         60
  36/-62/64 36/64/64         40
  36/-64/64 36/65/64         80
  36/-65/64 36/67/64         40
  36/-67/64 36/69/64         60
  36/-69/64 36/71/64         40
  =2                         =2
  36/-71/64 36/72/64         100
  144/-72/64                 .
  \*-                        \*-
  -------------------- -- -- ------------
Before using [**cleave**](/tool/cleave) to join the new key
velocity values to the `**MIDI` data we need to delete the current
key-down velocities. These are the values \`64\' preceding the tab
character. The [**humsed**](/tool/humsed) command can be used as
follows:

`humsed 's/64`*tab*/*tab*`/' scale.mid > scale.tmp`

The modified output will now be:

  ------------------ -- -- ------------
  `**MIDI`                 \*\*metpos
  \*Ch1                    \*
  \*M4/4                   \*M4/4
  \*tb8                    \*tb8
  =1-                      =1-
  72/60/                   100
  72/-60/64 72/62/         60
  36/-62/64 36/64/         40
  36/-64/64 36/65/         80
  36/-65/64 36/67/         40
  36/-67/64 36/69/         60
  36/-69/64 36/71/         40
  =2                       =2
  36/-71/64 36/72/         100
  144/-72/                 .
  \*-                      \*-
  ------------------ -- -- ------------
Finally, we use [**cleave**](/tool/cleave) to add the new
key-down velocities.

`cleave -i '**MIDI,**metpos' -o '**MIDI' scale.tmp > scale.mid`

The final output is:

  ---------------------
  `**MIDI`
  \*
  \*M4/4
  \*tb8
  =1-=1-
  72/60/100
  72/-60/64 72/62/60
  36/-62/64 36/64/40
  36/-64/64 36/65/80
  36/-65/64 36/67/40
  36/-67/64 36/69/60
  36/-69/64 36/71/40
  =2=2
  36/-71/64 36/72/100
  144/-72/
  \*-
  ---------------------

Creating Mixed Representations
------------------------------

For some analytic tasks it is often useful to generate a special
representation that combines all of the elements or types of data of
interest to the researcher. For example, suppose we were working on a
model of melodic organization that reduced melodies to three types of
information: relative-duration context, gross pitch height, and scale
step. Sample data tokens for our representation and their meanings are
given in the following table. Notice that the order of signifiers is
important:\
\

  ---------- ------------------------------------------------------
  token      **meaning**
             
  `LSLHto`   long-short-long rhythm, high pitch, tonic
  `LLSLsd`   long-long-short rhythm, low pitch, subdominant
  `MLSMlt`   medium-long-short rhythm, medium pitch, leading tone
  `r`        rest
  ---------- ------------------------------------------------------
In [Chapter 22](/guide/ch22) we learned how to use
[**recode**](/tool/recode) to classify various numerical ranges
and [**humsed**](/tool/humsed) to classify non-numeric data. We
already know how to create the elements of our new representation.

The scale degree information can be created by using
[**deg**](/tool/deg) and **humsed** can be used to transform the
signifiers as in the following `degree` file:

`s/1.*/to/  s/2.*/st/  s/3.*/me/  s/4.*/sd/  s/5.*/do/  s/6.*/sm/  s/7.*/lt/`

We can classify the pitch ranges into high, medium, and low using the
[**semits**](/tool/semits) command, followed by **recode**. For
example, we could transform the
[`**semits`](/rep/semits) data using the following
reassignment file:

  ------ -- ---
  `<0`      L
  \>16      H
  \>=0      M
  else      r
  ------ -- ---
Durations can be similarly classified into long (L), medium (M), and
short (S) using the [**dur**](/tool/dur) command, followed by
*recode*.

  -------- -- ---
  `>1.0`      L
  \>0.5       M
  \>0         S
  -------- -- ---
Using [**context**](/tool/context) **-n 3** we could then create
contextual \`triples\' so that data records contain three durations.
Suppose also that we have used **sed** to change the names of the
exclusive interpretations so they are more appropriate. As a result we
have three spines that, when assembled together are organized as in
Example 26.1

**Example 26.1**

  ------------ -- ----------- -- ----------------
  `**rhythm`      \*\*range      \*\*scale-step
  L S L           H              to
  L L S           L              sd
  M L S           M              lt
  r               r              r
  \*-             \*-            \*-
  ------------ -- ----------- -- ----------------
We need to process the first spine with **humsed** again to eliminate
the spaces in the multiple stops. The rhythm spine would be processed as
follows:

`humsed 's/ //g' rhythm > rhythm.new`

We could assemble these spines using the
[**assemble**](/tool/assemble) command:

`assemble rhythm.new range scale.step > newfile`

Finally we can use **cleave** to amalgamate all of the data into a
single final spine.

`cleave -i '**rhythm,**range,**scale-step' -o '**complex' \`
> newfile \> output


Having created our new representation, we can continue to process this
new data with the various Humdrum tools. For example, we could generate
inventories that answer questions such as \"How often does a high
subdominant note in a long-short-long rhythmic follow a low submediant
in a long-long-short context?


A similar approach can be used to address other questions, such as
whether large leaps involving chromatically-altered tones tend to have a
longer duration on the altered tone. Etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


Reprise
-------

In this chapter we have seen how [**rend**](/tool/rend) and
[**cleave**](/tool/cleave) can be used to take bits and pieces
of signifiers from potentially many spines, and assemble a composite
Humdrum spine that contains precisely the information of interest.
Before amalgamating spines, you can use the
[**humsed**](/tool/humsed) command to translate the
characters/signifiers so that you use your preferred way of representing
something.

