---
title:		'Humdrum Toolkit Command Reference -- mint'
author:		David Huron
chapternav:	tool
vim:		ft=html
permalink:	/tool/mint/index.html
---

### COMMAND

<span class="tool">mint</span> -- determine melodic intervals between successive pitches for
Humdrum inputs

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SYNOPSIS ##

` mint  [-acde]  [-b regexp]  [-s regexp]  [inputfile]  [ > outputfile.mnt]`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## DESCRIPTION ##

The <span class="tool">mint</span> command determines the distance (interval) between
successive pitches. Output pitch intervals are expressed as a diatonic
interval size plus interval quality; a leading plus or minus sign
indicates whether the interval is ascending or descending. By way of
illustration, <span class="tool">mint</span> will change a sequence of <span class="rep">pitch</span> data tokens
&mdash; such as *C4, A4, E4* &mdash; to the interval sequence *+M6, -P4.* Each
pitch-related input spine is transformed to a corresponding <span class="rep">mint</span>
output spine.

The <span class="tool">mint</span> command determines melodic intervals only for pitch tokens
*within* individual spines. Pitch intervals *across* spines are not
determined by <span class="tool">mint</span>.

No interval is calculated for the first pitch token; initial pitches are
simply echoed in the output &mdash; appearing in square brackets. These
initial pitches are referred to as *offset* values, since they indicate
the starting value from which subsequent intervals are calculated.
Offset values can prove useful in attempting to reconstruct the input,
but the user may wish to eliminate offset values in subsequent
processing (see below).

The <span class="tool">mint</span> command is able to handle multiple-stops. Data-flow
interruptions such as the occurrence of barlines can be handled using
the <span class="option">s</span> option. By defining *regular expression* patterns, the user
may select which types of data tokens should be ignored by <span class="tool">mint</span>.
(See EXAMPLES below.)

Note that the output spine generated by <span class="tool">mint</span> preserves the same
record-type structure as the input, and so may readily be pasted with
the input file using the Humdrum <span class="tool">assemble</span> command.

The <span class="tool">mint</span> command is able to accept any of the pitch-related
representations listed below. For descriptions of the various input
representations refer to Section 2 *(Representation Reference)* of this
reference manual.

It is recommended that output files produced using the <span class="tool">mint</span> command
should be given names with the distinguishing \`.mnt\' extension.

----------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------
<span class="rep">kern</span>    core pitch/duration representation
<span class="rep">pitch</span>   American National Standards Institute pitch notation (e.g. \"A\#4\")
<span class="rep">solfg</span>   French solfège system (fixed \`doh\')
<span class="rep">Tonh</span>    German pitch system
----------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------

*Input representations processed by <span class="tool">mint</span>.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## OPTIONS ##

The <span class="tool">mint</span> command provides the following options:

------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
<span class="option">a</span>        output absolute pitch interval without distinguishing ascending/descending
-b *regexp*   break; do not calculate difference for tokens matching *regexp*;
restart interval calculations with next pitch token
<span class="option">c</span>        output compound intervals as non-compound intervals
<span class="option">d</span>        output diatonic interval size only, without the interval quality
<span class="option">e</span>        used only with <span class="option">s</span> option; echo skipped data tokens rather than
outputting null tokens
<span class="option">h</span>        displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
-s *regexp*   skip; completely ignore tokens matching *regexp*; output null
token(s) instead
------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Options are specified in the command line.

By default, <span class="tool">mint</span> distinguishes ascending and descending intervals by
prepending a plus or minus sign. If the <span class="option">a</span> option is invoked, then
only unsigned (absolute) intervals are output.

The \"skip\" function takes precedence over the \"break\" function, so
input strings matching both the skip (-s) and break (-b) regular
expressions cause a skip rather than a break.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## EXAMPLES ##

The various aspects of the <span class="tool">mint</span> command are best illustrated using a
set of examples. Consider the following input: ``

----------
\*\*kern
=1
8c
8g
4.b-
.
8e
=2
4f
8r
8C
4FF
=3
\*-
----------

Using the default invocation, the <span class="tool">mint</span> command transforms the above
input as follows: ``

----------
\*\*mint
=1
\[c\]
+P5
+m3
.
-d5
=2
+m2
-P11
-P5
=3
\*-
----------

The leading or \"offset\" pitch \`c\' has been echoed in square brackets
in the third record. This represents the initial pitch from which
subsequent pitch distances are measured. This offset value reflects the
type of input given to <span class="tool">mint</span>, thus if the input format is ` **kern`
the offset pitch will be recorded in the same representation. Note that
for absolute pitch units: \`c\' (<span class="rep">kern</span>) equals \`C4\' (<span class="rep">pitch</span>)
equals \`do4\' (<span class="rep">solfg</span>) equals \`C4\' (<span class="rep">Tonh</span>).

The subsequent output value (+P5) indicates a melodic interval of an
ascending perfect fifth. This is followed by an ascending minor third
(+m3) followed by a descending diminished fifth (-d5).

Notice that the null-token in the sixth record has been echoed.
Null-tokens have no effect on interval calculations and are treated as
though they are non-existent. In addition, <span class="tool">mint</span> correctly echoes
(and ignores) both rests and kern-like barlines. Note that pitch
intervals spanning a rest continue to be calculated and that intervals
greater than an octave remain as \"compound intervals.\"

Depending on the application, users may wish to suppress the calculation
of intervals across rests. In this case, the <span class="tool">mint</span> command can be
invoked using the \"break\" (<span class="option">b</span>) option. Consider the command:

` mint -b 'r' input > output.mnt`

Each time <span class="tool">mint</span> encounters a data token that matches the letter \`r\'
it echoes the input token and begins looking for a new offset value.
Applied to the above sample input file, this command produces the
following output: ``

----------
\*\*mint
=1
\[c\]
+P5
+m3
.
-d5
=2
+m2
8r
\[C\]
-P5
=3
\*-
----------

Notice that the descending perfect eleventh spanning the rest has been
eliminated, and a new pitch offset value \`C\' has been echoed in the
corresponding output.

The <span class="option">s</span> (skip) option can be used to allow the user to selectively
identify records that should not be involved in processing. For example,
the command

` mint -s '^[^4]+$' input > output.mnt`

will cause any data token not matching the number 4 to be skipped during
processing. Given the sample input, intervals will be calculated only
between quarter-notes and dotted quarter-notes: ``

----------
\*\*mint
=1
8c
8g
\[b-\]
.
8e
=2
-P4
8r
8C
-P15
=3
\*-
----------

Using the skip option, the user may calculate melodic intervals between
pitches in strong metric positions, or pitches that have been marked as
structural tones.

The <span class="tool">mint</span> command is also able to process numerical data tokens
containing multiple-stops. Consider the following following sample
input: ``

-----------
\*\*pitch
C4
B3 D4
A3 C4 F4
C4
C4
\*-
-----------

Notice the presence of the double- and triple-stops in the third and
fourth records. Using the default invocation, the <span class="tool">mint</span> command
processes this input as follows: ``

---------------------
\*\*mint
\[C4\]
-m2 +M2
-M2 (+m2) (-M2) +m3
+m3 P1 -P4
P1
\*-
---------------------

The leading or offset value \[C4\] has been echoed in the second record.
(The user might wish to eliminate such offset values via the
<span class="tool">humsed</span> command; see below.) The third record in both
the input and output contain double-stops. In the output, the first
value of the double-stop (-m2) represents the pitch interval between C4
and B3. The second value in the double-stop (M2) represents the
difference between C4 and D4. In short, <span class="tool">mint</span> traces both possible
difference \"paths.\"

In processing successive multiple-stops <span class="tool">mint</span> does not calculate all
of the possible permutations. For example, in the case of two
consecutive triple-stops, <span class="tool">mint</span> will calculate three intervals
corresponding to the first notes in both triple-stops, the second notes,
and the third notes.

Where the number of multiple-stops changes, <span class="tool">mint</span> operates under some
special conventions. Consider, for example, the case of a double-stop
followed by a triple-stop: the pitches P+Q followed by X+Y+Z. All of the
possible (interval) differences might be enumerated as follows: X-P,
Y-P, Z-P, X-Q, Y-Q and Z-Q. **Mint** first calculates the \"outer\"
interval distances (X-P and Z-Q). It then calculates a permuted set of
\"inner\" intervals (Y-P and Y-Q). The remaining intervals are
considered unlikely or implausible and are not calculated by <span class="tool">mint</span>.

In the above example, moving from the double-stop to the triple stop
between records three and four generates two \"outer\" interval
distances (B3 to A3 -\> -M2; D4 to F4 -\> +m3), as well as the permuted
\"inner\" intervals (B3 to C4 -\> +m2; D4 to C4 -\> -M2). Both the
resulting inner intervals are printed in parentheses. A similar process
occurs when moving from records four to five. Three intervals may be
traced from the 3 initial pitches to the subsequent single pitch.

Depending on the goal, the presence of the parentheses makes it easy for
the user to eliminate the inner intervals using the Humdrum
stream-editor [<span class="tool">humsed</span>.](humsed.html) For example, the command

` humsed 's/([^)]*) //g' input > output`

can be used to eliminate inner intervals. Alternatively, the command

` humsed 's/[()]//g' input > output`

can be used to eliminate the parentheses surrounding the inner
intervals. Offset values can be transformed to null-tokens using the
command

` humsed 's/\\[[^]]*\\]/./g' input > output`

records containing offset values can be eliminated using the command

` humsed '/\\[.*\\]/d' input > output`

One final example illustrates how several spines can be processed
concurrently by <span class="tool">mint</span>. ``

----------------------------------------
!! J.S. Bach, keyboard Sinfonia No. 13
----------------------------------------

---------- ----------- ----------
\*\*Tonh   \*\*pitch   \*\*kern
\*M3/8     \*M3/8      \*M3/8
\*a:       \*a:        \*a:
=7         =7          =7
A3         G4          16ee
.          .           16ff\#
H3         F\#4        8.dd\#
H2         .           .
.          .           16ee
=8         =8          =8
E3         E4          4ee
.          F\#4        .
.          G4          .
.          A4          .
r          B4          \[8gg
.          C\#5        .
=9         =9          =9
r          \[D5        16gg\]
.          .           16bb-
.          .           16aa
.          .           16gg
.          .           16ff
.          .           16ee
=10        =10         =10
r          D5\]        \[4.ff
\*-        \*-         \*-
---------- ----------- ----------

The following command invokes the <span class="option">a</span> and <span class="option">d</span> options. Indications
of the direction of interval movement (ascending/descending) have been
removed, and the diatonic interval sizes are output without the
associated interval qualities (major/minor/perfect/diminished,
augmented).

` mint -a -d input | humsed 's/\\[[^\\t]*\\]/./g' > output`

Notice in the corresponding output that the initial offset pitches have
been changed to a null tokens (due to the <span class="tool">humsed</span> command). ``

----------------------------------------
!! J.S. Bach, keyboard Sinfonia No. 13
----------------------------------------

---------- ---------- ----------
\*\*mint   \*\*mint   \*\*mint
\*M3/8     \*M3/8     \*M3/8
\*a:       \*a:       \*a:
=7         =7         =7
.          .          .
.          .          2
2          2          3
8          .          .
.          .          2
=8         =8         =8
4          2          1
.          2          .
.          2          .
.          2          .
r          2          3
.          2          .
=9         =9         =9
r          2          1
.          .          3
.          .          2
.          .          2
.          .          2
.          .          2
=10        =10        =10
r          1          2
\*-        \*-        \*-
---------- ---------- ----------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## PORTABILITY ##

DOS 2.0 and up, with the MKS Toolkit. OS/2 with the MKS Toolkit. UNIX
systems supporting the *Korn* shell or *Bourne* shell command
interpreters, and revised *awk* (1985).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SEE ALSO ##

` **hint (2),  hint (4),  humsed (4), **kern (2), **mint (2),  recode (4), regexp (6), **semits (2),  semits (4), solfg (2), **Tonh (2),  xdelta (4),  ydelta (4)`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

-   [**Pertinent description in the Humdrum User
    Guide**](../guide11.html#Melodic_Intervals_Using_the_mint_Command)
-   [**Index to Humdrum Commands**](../commands.toc.html)
-   [**Table for Contents for Humdrum User Guide**](../guide.toc.html)

\
\
