---
title:		'Humdrum Toolkit Command Reference -- synco'
author:		David Huron
vim:		ft=html
permalink:	/tool/synco/index.html
---

### COMMAND

<span class="tool">synco</span> -- measure degree of metric syncopation for Humdrum input

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SYNOPSIS

` synco  [-e]  [inputfile ...]  [ > outputfile.syn]`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DESCRIPTION

The <span class="tool">synco</span> command characterizes the degree of metric syncopation
evident at successive moments in a passage. It outputs a single Humdrum
spine (<span class="rep">synco</span>) containing numerical values representing the
instantaneous level of syncopation.

The <span class="tool">synco</span> command requires at least two spines of input data &mdash; one
of which must be ` **metpos.` (The <span class="rep">metpos</span> representation encodes the
position in the metric hierarchy for each data record in the input.) The
other input spine(s) must contain information that explicitly or
implicitly encodes the occurrence of note onsets. Appropriate inputs to
<span class="tool">synco</span> include the pitch-related representations listed below. For
descriptions of the various input representations refer to Section 2
*(Representation Reference)* of this reference manual.

>   ------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------
>   <span class="rep">cbr</span>      critical band rate (in equivalent rectangular bandwidths)
>   <span class="rep">cents</span>    hundredths of a semitone with respect to middle C=0
>   <span class="rep">cocho</span>    cochlear coordinates (in millimeters)
>   <span class="rep">deg</span>      key-related relative scale degree
>   <span class="rep">degree</span>   key-related absolute scale degree
>   <span class="rep">freq</span>     fundamental frequency (in hertz)
>   <span class="rep">fret</span>     fretted-instrument pitch tablature
>   <span class="rep">kern</span>     core pitch/duration representation
>   <span class="rep">MIDI</span>     Music Instrument Digital Interface tablature
>   <span class="rep">pc</span>       pitch class
>   <span class="rep">pitch</span>    American National Standards Institute pitch notation (e.g. \"A\#4\")
>   <span class="rep">semits</span>   equal-tempered semitones with respect to middle C=0 (e.g. 12 = C5)
>   <span class="rep">solfa</span>    tonic solfa syllables
>   <span class="rep">solfg</span>    French solfège system (fixed \`doh\')
>   <span class="rep">specC</span>    spectral centroid (in hertz)
>   <span class="rep">Tonh</span>     German pitch system
>   ------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------
>
*Input representations processed by <span class="tool">synco</span>.*

The resulting <span class="rep">synco</span> spine contains numerical values, where zero
represents no metric syncopation and successively increasing values
represent increasing amounts of metric syncopation.

The <span class="tool">synco</span> command implements a definition of metric syncopation
inspired by the work of Lee and Longuet-Higgins (see
[REFERENCES](#REFERENCES)). In brief, metric syncopation may be defined
as a moment where an expected metric stress is absent. More
specifically, a metrically syncopated moment is defined as occurring
when no note-onset happens at a moment whose metric position is more
important than that of the most recent note onset. For example, where a
note onset occurs on the second beat of a quadruple meter, and is not
followed by a note onset on the third beat, the third beat is deemed
metrically syncopated because it occupies a higher metric position than
the previous onset.

The numerical output values generated by <span class="tool">synco</span> are calculated as the
logarithm of the metric position of the previous onset minus the
logarithm of the metric position of the current moment &mdash; where the
current moment has no note onset, and coincides with a higher metric
position than the previous onset. The use of the logarithmic difference
weights the output values so that missing downbeats at the beginning of
a measure produce a greater metric syncopation value than lesser beats
or sub-beats in the measure. In addition, metric syncopation is greater
when the difference in metric position between the previous onset and
the current moment is greatest. (See [EXAMPLES](#EXAMPLES).)

If more than one musical part is given as input, <span class="tool">synco</span> responds to
the *aggregate* rhythmic structure &mdash; as though all of the parts were
amalgamated into a single rhythmic stream. By itself, a single musical
part may evoke considerable metric syncopation, but in combination with
other parts, metrically syncopated moments are typically fewer. In
short, running <span class="tool">synco</span> on a multi-part score normally produces
different results from running <span class="tool">synco</span> on each part individually.

<span class="tool">synco</span> monitors the input in order to determine the Humdrum
*time-base* &mdash; if encoded. Specifically, <span class="tool">synco</span> checks to ensure
that the time-base is not excessively short. It is possible to have
time-base values that exceed the temporal resolving power of human
listeners. For example, if an onset appears a thirty-second duration
prior to an expected down-beat, listeners are apt to hear the displaced
onset as occurring **on** the beat rather than being a very short
syncopation. \"Excessively short\" is operationally defined as a
time-base resolution shorter than a sixteenth note. In such cases,
<span class="tool">synco</span> issues a warning, noting that the time-base may be too short.

Note that only one metrically syncopated moment can happen following a
given note onset; subsequent syncopated moments require the intervention
of another note onset. By way of example, a note occurring immediately
prior to an absent major downbeat, will not also cause syncopated
moments to arise for other beats within a measure containing only rests.
In short, two metrically syncopated moments can't occur without some
note onset intervening.

It is recommended that output files produced using the <span class="tool">synco</span> command
should be given names with the distinguishing \`.syn\' extension.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OPTIONS

The <span class="tool">synco</span> command provides the following options:

>   -------- -------------------------------------------------------
>   <span class="option">e</span>   echo the input in the output
>   <span class="option">h</span>   displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
>   -------- -------------------------------------------------------
>
Options are specified in the command line.

If the <span class="option">e</span> option is invoked, the output will echo all of the input
spines along with the <span class="rep">synco</span> output.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#EXAMPLES}

### EXAMPLES

The following two examples illustrate the use of **synco.** In both
examples, the left-most spines represent the input, and the right-most
spine (labelled <span class="rep">synco</span>) represents the corresponding output.

The first example shows the minimum input of a single <span class="rep">pitch</span> input
plus the metric position information (<span class="rep">metpos</span>). The meter signature
is 2/4 and the time-base is an eighth duration. (See the [**timebase
(4)** command.) Hence there are 4 data records per measure. The first
beat in each measure is assigned the metric position \"1\"; the second
beat is assigned the metric position \"2\"; and the second half of each
beat is assigned the metric position \"3\". Zero values in the <span class="rep">synco</span>
spine indicate the absence of any syncopation. In measure 3, a single
syncopated moment happens at beat 2. The output was produced using the
simple command: `synco inputfile`. ``](timebase.html)

>   ---------------- ------------ -----------
>   !! Example \#1                
>   \*\*pitch        \*\*metpos   \*\*synco
>   \*M2/4           \*M2/4       \*
>   \*tb8            \*tb8        \*tb8
>   =1               =1           =1
>   r                1            0
>   .                3            0
>   r                2            0
>   A4               3            0
>   =2               =2           =2
>   G4               1            0
>   .                3            0
>   B4               2            0
>   r                3            0
>   =3               =3           =3
>   C5               1            0
>   C5               3            0
>   .                2            0.41
>   B4               3            0
>   =4               =4           =4
>   \*-              \*-          \*-
>   ---------------- ------------ -----------
>
In the following example, two metrically syncopated moments are evident.
Notice that the rhythmic information for the two <span class="rep">kern</span> spines is
amalgamated, and that the non-pitch spine (<span class="rep">foo</span>) has no affect on the
processing. ``

>   ---------------- ---------- ------------ ---------- -----------
>   !! Example \#2                                      
>   \*\*foo          \*\*kern   \*\*metpos   \*\*kern   \*\*synco
>   \*               \*M2/4     \*M2/4       \*M2/4     \*
>   \*               \*tb8      \*tb8        \*tb8      \*tb8
>   A                =1         =1           =1         =1
>   A                4r         1            4r         0
>   A                .          4            .          0
>   A                .          3            .          0
>   A                .          4            .          0
>   A                8r         2            8r         0
>   A                .          4            .          0
>   A                \[8a       3            \[8a       0
>   A                .          4            .          0
>   A                =2         =2           =2         =2
>   A                4a\]       1            8a\]       1.10
>   A                .          4            .          0
>   A                .          3            8a         0
>   A                .          4            .          0
>   A                8b         2            8r         0
>   A                .          4            .          0
>   A                8r         3            8b         0
>   A                .          4            .          0
>   A                =3         =3           =3         =3
>   A                8cc        1            8cc        0
>   A                .          4            .          0
>   A                4.cc       3            4cc        0
>   A                .          4            .          0
>   A                .          2            .          0.41
>   A                .          4            .          0
>   A                .          3            8b         0
>   A                .          4            .          0
>   A                =4         =4           =4         =4
>   \*-              \*-        \*-          \*-        \*-
>   ---------------- ---------- ------------ ---------- -----------
>
------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PORTABILITY

DOS 2.0 and up, with the MKS Toolkit. OS/2 with the MKS Toolkit. UNIX
systems supporting the *Korn* shell or *Bourne* shell command
interpreters, and revised *awk* (1985).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEE ALSO

`  metpos (4), **synco (2),  timebase (4),  urrhythm (4)`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#REFERENCES}

### REFERENCES

Longuet-Higgins, H. C., & Lee, C. S. \"The perception of musical
rhythms,\" *Perception,* Vol. 11 (1982) pp. 115-128.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

-   [**Pertinent description in the Humdrum User
    Guide**](../guide23.html#Synco)
-   [**Index to Humdrum Commands**](../commands.toc.html)
-   [**Table for Contents for Humdrum User Guide**](../guide.toc.html)

\
\
