---
title:		'Humdrum Toolkit Command Reference -- hint'
author:		David Huron
chapternav:	tool
vim:		ft=html
permalink:	/tool/hint/index.html
---

### COMMAND

<span class="tool">hint</span> &mdash; determine harmonic intervals between concurrent pitches for
Humdrum inputs

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SYNOPSIS

` hint  [-a|-l|-v]  [-cdu]  [-s regexp]  [inputfile ...]  [> outputfile.hnt]`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DESCRIPTION

The <span class="tool">hint</span> command outputs the harmonic interval distances between
simultaneous notated pitches. Output pitch intervals are expressed as a
combination of diatonic interval size and interval quality (such as a
\`perfect fifth\' or \`minor ninth\'). Standard musical abbreviations
are used (e.g., m2 - minor second; P4 - perfect fourth; A6 - augmented
sixth; dd7 - doubly diminished seventh). By way of illustration,
<span class="tool">hint</span> will change the ` **pitch` diad *C4-E4* (or *E4-C4)* &mdash; to the
interval token *M3.*

The <span class="tool">hint</span> command determines harmonic intervals for pitch tokens
spanning all pitch-related spines in an input record; this includes
multiple-stops within spines. In the default operation, a single output
interpretation ` (**hint)` is generated for any given input. All pitches
in a given sonority (sounding moment) are first sorted in ascending
pitch order. If the <span class="option">u</span> option is selected, duplicate pitches
(unisons) are treated as a single pitch-instance when calculating the
intervening intervals. Intervals are then calculated between successive
pairs of pitches &mdash; ordered from low to high. A single data token is
output &mdash; representing all intervals in a given sonority. If more than
one interval is present, the interval tokens are assembled as Humdrum
multiple-stops within the output data token.

Input records containing no pitch tokens result in the outputting of a
null token (.). Input records containing only rests result in the
outputting of a rest token (r). Input records containing only a single
pitch result in the outputting of a hyphen (-). Input records containing
only a single duplicated pitch result in the outputting of the interval
(P1) &mdash; unless the <span class="option">u</span> option is selected, in which case the a
hyphen is output (-).

The <span class="tool">hint</span> command recognizes and echoes \"common-system\" barlines
(see *barlines (2)*). It is also able to handle multiple-stops.

By defining *regular expression* patterns, the user may select which
data records should be ignored by **hint.** (See [EXAMPLES](#EXAMPLES)
below.)

Note that the output spine generated by <span class="tool">hint</span> preserves the same
record-type structure as the input, and so may readily be pasted with
the input file using the Humdrum <span class="tool">assemble</span> command.

The <span class="tool">hint</span> command is able to accept any of the pitch-related
representations listed below. For descriptions of the various input
representations refer to Section 2 *(Representation Reference)* of this
reference manual.

It is recommended that output files produced using the <span class="tool">hint</span> command
should be given names with the distinguishing \`.hnt\' extension.

>   ----------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------
>   <span class="rep">kern</span>    core absolute pitch representation
>   <span class="rep">Tonh</span>    German pitch system
>   <span class="rep">pitch</span>   American National Standards Institute pitch notation (e.g. \"A\#4\")
>   <span class="rep">solfg</span>   French solfège system (fixed \`doh\')
>   ----------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------
>
*Input representations processed by <span class="tool">hint</span>.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OPTIONS

The <span class="tool">hint</span> command provides the following options:

>   ------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------
>   <span class="option">a</span>        calculate all intervals by permuting all pitches present
>   <span class="option">c</span>        output compound intervals as non-compound intervals
>   <span class="option">d</span>        output diatonic interval size only, without the interval quality
>   <span class="option">h</span>        displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
>   <span class="option">l</span>        calculate intervals with respect to the lowest pitch present
>   -s *regexp*   skip; completely ignore records matching *regexp;*
>                 (output null token)
>   <span class="option">u</span>        eliminate unisons from the output
>   ------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------
>
The <span class="option">a</span> and <span class="option">l</span> options are mutually exclusive.

Options are specified in the command line.

The <span class="option">a</span> option causes all permuted intervals within a sonority to be
output rather than only those intervals between successive pitch-ordered
pitches. Hence, the sonority (E4 G4 C5) will produce the output m3 m6 P4
rather than m3 P4. A tandem interpretation (`*all`) is added to the
output in order to indicate that the interval content is exhaustive.
Note that the order of the intervals in the output token no longer has
any significance when the <span class="option">a</span> option is invoked.

The <span class="option">c</span> option causes all compound intervals to be output as
non-compound equivalents. Compound intervals are defined as those
intervals greater than or equal to an octave in size. Hence, a major
tenth interval will be output as a major third, and an octave will be
output as a perfect unison.

The <span class="option">d</span> option causes only the diatonic interval size to be output.
In this case, the interval quality signifiers (`AdmMP`) will be
suppressed. For example, with the <span class="option">d</span> option, the output token \`3\'
signifies any interval of a third, including major, minor, diminished,
etc.

The <span class="option">l</span> option causes <span class="tool">hint</span> to calculate all intervals with
respect to the lowest notated pitch present. Hence, the input sonority
(G4 E4 C4) will produce the output M3 P5 rather than M3 m3.

The <span class="option">s</span> option allows the user to define a regular expression, that
if matched, causes a null token to be output for the given record.

The <span class="option">u</span> option eliminates duplicate pitches in interval calculations.
For example, rather than outputting P1 M3 P1 for the sonority (C4 C4 E4
E4), the <span class="option">u</span> option will result in the output M3. In the case of a
sonority consisting of a repeated single pitch, the <span class="option">u</span> option will
cause a hyphen (-) to be output.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#EXAMPLES}

### EXAMPLES

The various aspects of the <span class="tool">hint</span> command are illustrated in the
following examples. Consider the following input: ``

>   ---------- ---------- ----------- ---------------------
>   \*\*kern   \*\*kern   \*\*pitch   \*\*commentary
>   =1         =1         =1          barline
>   8c         8e         G4          C major triad
>   8g         8c         E4          reordered pitches
>   4r         4r         r           rest
>   .          .          .           null tokens
>   4C         4e         G5          open position triad
>   =2         =2         =2          barline
>   4C 4E      4G 4c      C5          multiple-stops
>   4CC 4r     4e 4g      r           mixed notes & rest
>   8C         8C         .           unison
>   8C         8r         .           single pitch
>   =3         =3         =3          barline
>   \*-        \*-        \*-         \*-
>   ---------- ---------- ----------- ---------------------
>
Using the default invocation, the <span class="tool">hint</span> command transforms the above
input as follows: ``

>   -------------
>   \*\*hint
>   =1
>   M3 m3
>   M3 m3
>   .
>   M10 m10
>   =2
>   M3 m3 P4 P8
>   M17 m3
>   P1
>   \-
>   =3
>   \*-
>   -------------
>
The <span class="tool">hint</span> command correctly echoes (and ignores) both rests and
kern-like barlines &mdash; as illustrated in the first and fourth output
data records. The second output data record (M3 m3) indicates that two
intervals are present: the first interval is a major third above the
lowest pitch, and the second interval is a minor third above the other
pitch. The third data record shows that rearranging the order of the
input pitches has no effect on the output.

Notice that the null-token in the sixth record has been echoed.
Null-tokens have no effect on interval calculations and are treated as
though they are non-existent. Multiple-stops are treated the same as if
each pitch was in a separate spine (eighth data record), and rests
within a sonority containing pitches are ignored (ninth data record).
The perfect unison signifier (P1) is output only if more than one pitch
is present (tenth data record). If a single pitch is present in the
input, a hyphen is output rather than the P1 token (eleventh data
record).

The <span class="option">d</span> option causes only the diatonic interval sizes to be output
as follows: ``

>   ----------
>   \*\*hint
>   =1
>   3 3
>   3 3
>   .
>   10 10
>   =2
>   3 3 4 8
>   17 3
>   1
>   \-
>   =3
>   \*-
>   ----------
>
The <span class="option">s</span> (skip) option can be used to allow the user to selectively
identify records that should not be involved in processing. Consider the
command

> ` hint -s r input > output.hnt`

will cause any data token containing the letter \`r\' to suspend the
calculation of any harmonic intervals for the current record. The
corresponding <span class="rep">hint</span> output for data records matching the pattern will
consist simply of a null token. Given the sample input, intervals will
be calculated only when none of the pitch-related spines contain a rest.

Given the first three spines of the above sample input (i.e. without the
<span class="rep">commentary</span> spine), the command

> ` hint -cu -s r input > output`

will produce the following output: ``

>   ----------
>   \*\*hint
>   =1
>   M3 m3
>   M3 m3
>   .
>   M3 m3
>   =2
>   M3 m3 P4
>   .
>   \-
>   \-
>   =3
>   \*-
>   ----------
>
Notice that the major and minor tenths in the sixth data record have
been rendered as major and minor thirds. Also note that the perfect
unison in the tenth data record has been output as a hyphen &mdash; and that
the P1 formerly present in the eighth data record has disappeared. The
presence of the rest in the original ninth data record has caused the
outputting of a simple null token.

The <span class="option">l</span> option causes <span class="tool">hint</span> to calculate intervals with respect to
the lowest pitch present in the sonority. For example, with the above
sample input, the <span class="option">l</span> option would produce the following output: ``

>   --------------
>   \*\*hint
>   \*
>   =1
>   M3 P5
>   M3 P5
>   .
>   M10 P19
>   =2
>   M3 P5 P8 P15
>   M17 P19
>   P1
>   \-
>   =3
>   \*-
>   --------------
>
The <span class="option">a</span> option calculates all possible intervals by pairing all
pitches present in a given sonority. The order of the output intervals
conforms to the following standard: all pitches are sorted from low to
high; intervals are determined as 1-2, 1-3, 1-4, etc., 2-3, 2-4, etc. By
way of example, the following input: ``

>   ---------- ----------
>   \*\*kern   \*\*kern
>   4C 4E 4G   4c 4c 4r
>   \*-        \*-
>   ---------- ----------
>
would produce the following output: ``

>   -------------------------------
>   \*\*hint
>   \*all
>   M3 P5 P8 P8 m3 m6 m6 P4 P4 P1
>   \*-
>   -------------------------------
>
------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PORTABILITY

DOS 2.0 and up, with the MKS Toolkit. OS/2 with the MKS Toolkit. UNIX
systems supporting the *Korn* shell or *Bourne* shell command
interpreters, and revised *awk* (1985).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEE ALSO

` **deg (2), **degree (2), **hint (2),  humsed (4), **kern (2), **mint (2),  mint (4),  recode (4), regexp (6), **semits (2),  semits (4),  solfg (2), **Tonh (2),  xdelta (4),  ydelta (4)`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

-   [**Pertinent description in the Humdrum User
    Guide**](../guide15.html#Harmonic_Intervals_Using_the_hint_Command)
-   [**Index to Humdrum Commands**](../commands.toc.html)
-   [**Table for Contents for Humdrum User Guide**](../guide.toc.html)

\
\
