---
title:		'Humdrum Toolkit Command Reference -- xdelta'
author:		David Huron
last-edited:	
chapternav:	tool
vim:		ft=html
permalink:	/tool/xdelta/index.html
---

### COMMAND

<span class="tool">xdelta</span> &mdash; calculate sequential numeric differences between
successive Humdrum data tokens

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SYNOPSIS ##

` xdelta  [-ae]  [-b regexp]  [-s regexp]  [inputfile ...]`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## DESCRIPTION ##

The <span class="tool">xdelta</span> command calculates the numeric differences between
successive data tokens within individual spines. By way of illustration,
<span class="tool">xdelta</span> will change a sequence of numerical tokens &mdash; such as *x, y,
z* &mdash; to their successive differences *y-x, z-y*. The <span class="tool">xdelta</span>
command might be used for such purposes as determining the melodic
interval distances between successive pitches in a musical line, or
calculating changes of duration for successive notes.

Each output interpretation is automatically assigned a new name by
prepending the letter \`X\' to the input interpretations. For example,
an input of ` **semits` will result in an output interpretation named
` **Xsemits.` Output from <span class="tool">xdelta</span> may be reprocessed as input, so
that the \`differences between the differences\' (i.e. second
derivative) may be calculated. Once again, the letter \`X\' will be
prepended to the input interpretation, so that an input interpretation
such as ` **Xfreq` will result in an output interpretation named
` **XXfreq.`

The <span class="tool">xdelta</span> command has a number of subtleties in its operation that
facilitate the processing of music-related data. However, these
subtleties can lead to unexpected results for the inexperienced user;
caution is advised.

Numeric data are processed by calculating the arithmetic difference
between successive data tokens within each spine. Hence, an input token
\``-5`\' followed by \``-2`\' will result in an output of \``3`\'.
Positive output values indicate increasing input values; negative output
values indicate decreasing input values. Null tokens are simply echoed
in the output, however numerical processing continues as if the null
tokens were absent. For example, the input token \``-5`\' followed by a
null token, followed by \``-2`\' will result in an output of \``3`\'.

No difference value is calculated for the first numeric input token;
however, the numeric value of the first numeric token is echoed in the
output &mdash; appearing in square brackets. These initial values are
referred to as *offset* values, since they indicate the starting value
from which subsequent differences are calculated. Offset values can
prove useful in attempting to reconstruct the input, but the user may
wish to eliminate offset values in subsequent processing (see below).

All data tokens containing only non-numeric data are simply echoed in
the output. In the default operation, data tokens without numbers cause
the difference calculation to be suspended, and the next occurrence of a
numeric token is treated as a new offset value for subsequent
calculations. As noted, null-tokens (.) are also directly echoed. If
data tokens contain both numeric and non-numeric data (e.g. `42abc`),
the default operation is to suppress the echoing of non-numeric
signifiers in the corresponding output. Hence, an input token \``33b`\'
followed by \``p51.3xm`\' will result in the output token \``18.3`\'
(i.e. 51.3 - 33). However, the accompanying non-numeric data can be
echoed in the output by invoking the <span class="option">e</span> option.

The <span class="tool">xdelta</span> command is able to calculate unsigned (absolute) values
where appropriate &mdash; using the <span class="option">a</span> option. It is also able to handle
multiple stops and data-flow interruptions such as the occurrence of
barlines. By defining *regular expression* patterns, the user may select
which types of data tokens should be ignored by <span class="tool">xdelta</span>. (See
EXAMPLES below.)

Note that the output spine generated by <span class="tool">xdelta</span> preserves the same
record-type structure as the input, and so may readily be pasted with
the input file using the Humdrum <span class="tool">assemble</span> command.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## OPTIONS ##

The <span class="tool">xdelta</span> command provides the following options:

------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------
<span class="option">a</span>        output absolute difference values
-b *regexp*   break; do not calculate difference for tokens matching *regexp;*
restart difference calculations with next numerical token
<span class="option">e</span>        echo non-numeric data for input tokens containing numbers
<span class="option">h</span>        displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
-s *regexp*   skip; completely ignore tokens matching *regexp;*
(echo in output only)
------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------

Options are specified in the command line.

The \"skip\" function takes precedence over the \"break\" function, so
input strings matching both the skip (-s) and break (-b) regular
expressions cause a skip rather than a break.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## EXAMPLES ##

The various aspects of the <span class="tool">xdelta</span> command are best illustrated using
a set of examples. Consider the following input:

``

-----------
\*\*cents
100
300
.
1200
600
-200
1000
\*-
-----------

Using the default invocation, the <span class="tool">xdelta</span> command transforms the
above input into the following output: ``

------------
\*\*Xcents
\[100\]
200
.
900
-600
\[-200\]
1200
\*-
------------

Notice that the input interpretation (<span class="rep">cents</span>) has been modified to
<span class="rep">Xcents</span> in the first record. As can be seen, the leading or
\"offset\" value \``100`\' has been echoed in the second record &mdash;
although it has been printed in square brackets. This is not a
\"difference\" value since there is no previous numerical value from
which to calculate a difference; <span class="tool">xdelta</span> simply echoes the initial
starting value. The third output record contains the value \``200`\' &mdash;
which is the difference between the second and third input records (300
minus 100). (Musically, we would say that the difference between 100
cents above middle C followed by 300 cents above middle C is an increase
of plus 200 cents.) The null-token in the fourth record has been echoed.
Null-tokens have no effect on subsequent numerical calculations and are
treated as though they are non-existent. Thus the fifth output record
contains the difference between the third and fifth input records (1200
minus 300 equals 900). The sixth input record (\``600`\') is lower in
value than the preceding value (\``1200`\') and so produces a negative
output (60-nus 1200 equals -600). The seventh input record contains no
numerical value; as a result, <span class="tool">xdelta</span> \"breaks\" operation; it cannot
calculate a numerical difference value. The output action is to echo the
input token (\``r`\') and to begin looking for a new offset value. The
eighth input record (\``-200`\') begins a new sequence of numerical
values; the output echoes `[-200]` as the new offset. The ninth input
record (`1000`) is 1200 cents above -200, and so the corresponding
output value is 1200.

Sometimes numerical values appear in tokens that the user doesn't want
processed. A good example occurs with numbered barlines. Consider the
following simple example. ``

---------
\*\*dur
1.6
=1
2.5
\*-
---------

If the <span class="tool">xdelta</span> command is invoked with the default options, the
output will be: ``

----------
\*\*Xdur
\[1.6\]
-0.6
1.5
\*-
----------

In other words, the measure number (1) interacts (incorrectly) with the
duration values. This can be avoided by using the <span class="option">s</span> (skip) option.
The skip option allows the user to identify records that should not be
involved in *delta* processing. The <span class="rep">dur</span> barline signifier is the
equals-sign; hence, the command ` xdelta -s = input` will cause the
barlines to be ignored in the numerical calculation, and so produce the
following (correct) output: ``

----------
\*\*Xdur
\[1.6\]
=1
0.9
\*-
----------

Some inputs may contain multiple-stops &mdash; that is, Humdrum data tokens
containing two or more encoded components. The <span class="tool">xdelta</span> command is
also able to process numerical data tokens containing
multiple-components. Consider, for example, the following ` **semits`
file: ``

------------
\*\*semits
3
4 7
-3 -7 11
12
\*-
------------

Notice the presence of the double- and triple-stops in the fourth and
fifth records. Using the default invocation, the <span class="tool">xdelta</span> command
processes this input as follows: ``

------------------
\*\*Xsemits
\[3\]
1 4
-7 (-11) (-14) 4
15 19 1
\*-
------------------

Once again, the input interpretation (<span class="rep">semits</span>) has been modified to
<span class="rep">Xsemits</span>. The leading or offset value \[3\] has been echoed in the
second record. (The user might wish to eliminate such offset values via
the <span class="tool">humsed</span> command; see below.) The third records in
both the input and output contain double-stops. In the output, the first
value of the double-stop (\`1\') represents the difference between 3 and
4. The second value in the double-stop (\`4\') represents the difference
between 3 and 7. In short, <span class="tool">xdelta</span> traces both possible difference
\"paths.\" In moving from the pitch D\# to two concurrent pitches (E and
G), we may trace both the D\#-E interval (1 semit) and the D\#-G
interval (3 semits).

In processing successive multiple-stops <span class="tool">xdelta</span> does not calculate
all of the possible permutations. For example, in the case of two
consecutive triple-stops, <span class="tool">xdelta</span> will calculate three intervals
corresponding to the first notes in both triple-stops, the second notes,
and the third notes.

Where the number of multiple-stops changes, <span class="tool">xdelta</span> operates under
some special conventions. Consider, for example, the case of a
double-stop followed by a triple-stop: the pitches P+Q followed by
X+Y+Z. All of the possible (interval) differences might be enumerated as
follows: X-P, Y-P, Z-P, X-Q, Y-Q and Z-Q. **Xdelta** first calculates
the \"outer\" interval distances (X-P and Z-Q). It then calculates a
permuted set of \"inner\" intervals (Y-P and Y-Q). The remaining
intervals are considered unlikely or implausible and are not calculated
by <span class="tool">xdelta</span>.

In the above example, moving from the double-stop to the triple stop
between records three and four generates the two \"outer\" interval
distances (-3 minus 4 equals -7; 11 minus 7 equals 4), as well as the
permuted \"inner\" intervals (-7 minus 4 equals -11; -7 minus 7 equals
-14). Both the resulting inner intervals are printed in parentheses. A
similar process occurs when moving from records four to five. Three
intervals may be traced from the 3 initial tokens to the subsequent
single token.

Depending on the goal, the presence of the parentheses makes it easy for
the user to eliminate the inner intervals using the Humdrum
stream-editor [<span class="tool">humsed</span>.](humsed.html) For example, the command:

` humsed 's/([^)]*) //g' input > output`

can be used to eliminate inner intervals. Alternatively, the command:

` humsed 's/[()]//g' input > output`

can be used to eliminate the parentheses surrounding the inner
intervals. Offset values can be transformed to null-tokens using the
command:

` humsed 's/\[[^]]*\]/./g' input > output`

Entire records containing offset values can be eliminated using the
command:

` humsed '/\[.*\]/d' input > output`

A further example shows how the output of <span class="tool">xdelta</span> can be recirculated
as input, and the second derivative calculated. In the example below,
the first spine is the original input, consisting of a rising-falling
major arpeggio, followed by an ascending major scale. The second spine
is the corresponding output from the command:

` xdelta -s = spine1 | humsed 's/\[.*\]/./' > spine2`

The original input and both outputs have been assembled together below.

Notice that barlines have been skipped and that the initial offset value
has been changed to a null token (using **humsed).** The second spine
has then been used as input to <span class="tool">xdelta</span> with the result of the
following command given in the third spine.

` xdelta -a -s = spine2 | humsed 's/\[.*\]/./' > spine3`

Notice that only absolute numerical differences have been generated in
the third spine. In the output below, semitone pitch values are
coordinated with the interval by which it was approached (2nd spine) and
by the change of interval size (3rd spine). Notice that large values in
third spine (e.g. 10 and 6) correspond to points in the input where the
arpeggio changes direction, and where the arpeggio changes to a scale.
(It is common to encounter such large discontinuities whenever a pattern
changes.) ``

------------ ------------- --------------
\*\*semits   \*\*Xsemits   \*\*XXsemits
\*M3/4       \*M3/4        \*M3/4
=1           =1            =1
0            .             .
4            4             .
7            3             1
=2           =2            =2
12           5             2
7            -5            10
4            -3            2
=3           =3            =3
0            -4            1
2            2             6
4            2             0
5            1             1
=4           =4            =4
7            2             1
9            2             0
11           2             0
=5           =5            =5
12           1             1
====         ====          ====
\*-          \*-           \*-
------------ ------------- --------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## PORTABILITY ##

DOS 2.0 and up, with the MKS Toolkit. OS/2 with the MKS Toolkit. UNIX
systems supporting the *Korn* shell or *Bourne* shell command
interpreters, and revised *awk* (1985).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## SEE ALSO ##

`  assemble (4),  humsed (4),  mint (4),  recode (4),  regexp (4), regexp (6),  ydelta (4)`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

-   [**Pertinent description in the Humdrum User
    Guide**](../guide11.html#Calculating_Melodic_Intervals_Using_the_xdelta_Command)
-   [**Index to Humdrum Commands**](../commands.toc.html)
-   [**Table for Contents for Humdrum User Guide**](../guide.toc.html)

\
\
